## Abstract
A model is proposed that forecasts the long-term efficacy, sustainability, and risk dynamics of given utility?s renewal and replacement program (RRP) of linear water and sewer assets (pipes). Using a spatial dataset of a given water or sewer utility?s network of linear assets, risk of failure of each pipe segment is incremented annually based on pipe age, material, and size, for each simulation year. In parallel, annual pipe RRPs are simulated by applying a given utility?s RRP capacity (miles of pipe replaced or renewed per year) toward pipe segments having the highest risk of failure. At each time step along an annual time series, the model returns a of snapshot of system-wide risk-based parameters including: expected value of failures (product of probability and cost), pipe mileage above user-defined risk thresholds, and length-weighted average and maximum pipe ages. Model results forecast the long-term sustainability of RRPs by indicating the characteristics of theoretical equilibrium (e.g. when average system age no longer changes) and by approximating when eras of peak-risk are expected. Leveraging the model, examples are explored that demonstrate how a utility can optimize their acceptable level of risk with current and future RRP budgets. Results indicate that future RRP costs and risks are significantly impacted by the pipe networks' past and present development phases (e.g. when spikes of expansion or replacement have occurred). Additionally, results highlight the imperative of consistency and very long term planning (100 years or more) of RRPs towards building highly risk-efficient and sustainable infrastructure management for utilities of the 22nd century and beyond.
